As long as we live in Satan’s world,
all of us will face situations
that can rob us of our peace.
Regaining that peace can be difficult
but not impossible.
In this video, we will hear
from three sisters and two couples
who will speak candidly about their trials
and how they struggled to cope with them.
But in spite of what they have endured,
please take note of their smiles, their joy,
and what they did to regain
and maintain their peace.
And take special note
of how Jehovah helped them.
The Governing Body knows that many of you
are suffering circumstances
not unlike the ones we will hear about,
and they trust that the examples
in this video
will help each of you to maintain your peace
as you endure various trials.
Brothers and sisters all over the world
are facing
natural disasters,
economic collapse,
illness,
and persecution.
Despite all that,
they keep joy and peace.
I can learn a lot from them.
My name is Antoinette.
I live here in Las Vegas, Nevada,
with my supermom
and my troublemaking sister.
Family and friends have always been
important to me.
As a child, I lived with my mom and dad
and I was very close
to my dad’s side of the family.
It was very loving, unified, and fun.
I was pretty happy.
But I already was starting to feel
the effects of my cancer.
We just didn’t know what it was really.
One day I was OK, and then the next day
I started feeling bad, you know.
In my childhood,
I played an unusual game.
I would catch insects,
put them in a jar, and then bring them home.
Then, I would get books,
such as the Criminal Procedural Code,
open them up,
and start judging one of the bugs.
I would play the role
of investigator and judge at the same time.
I was born into a family where everyone,
starting with my grandparents,
was either wearing an officer’s uniform
or a judge’s robe.
That’s why I had
this strong sense of justice.
But in 1989,
my mother was in a tragic car accident,
and
she got severe burns
on her face, hands, and body.
And then my father,
at seeing my mom’s condition,
decided to leave us.
Yeah.
And it was at that moment, I guess,
that my world, my ideals,
they crumbled.
As a little kid, I always wanted, like,
one big happy family.
Once we moved to New York for my treatment,
I no longer had that big family bond anymore.
What I was feeling back then in New York was
just sadness,
never really peace.
Here in California,
we’re used to fires.
But when I got the call to evacuate
that morning,
I never knew that by that evening,
the whole town of Paradise would be gone.
Just before the fire,
we had the needs of the congregation
where they instructed us
what to do in the case of a disaster.
I had the truck full of gas,
I had my go bag ready,
and I had a map of where I was going.
I was ready.
The brothers, also in their instructions,
said to obey the traffic instructors.
The instructor told us to turn right,
and I didn’t want to turn right,
but they said obey them.
So I turned right,
though I thought it would be really bad.
The smoke got darker and darker,
and finally it got black.
You couldn’t see anything.
My mom has always told me
that I’ve always been
a caregiver ever since I was a little girl;
it was just part of who I was.
I don’t like to see people suffer;
it’s very difficult for me.
I remember that when I first started working
as a nurse,
I would always cry.
I cried—
Literally I cried
every day that I had to go to work.
Not only was I overwhelmed
being a new nurse
but also
I was battling my depression.
In 2017,
I was the treasurer
for a prestigious bank in Nicaragua,
and I was the father of a one-year-old son.
We were very happy.
But then I lost my job.
So I said, ‘I have the experience,
and Jehovah will help me find another job,
something similar.’
And I kept looking for jobs,
but doors kept closing.
I felt very tense;
it made me feel very useless,
like
I couldn’t even provide for my family.
It was something very difficult for me.
These dear brothers and sisters
faced serious challenges.
They may have had moments
when they felt like Job
when he said: “I loathe my life.”
That is not an unusual human emotion.
Sometimes things in life
don’t work out as we had hoped,
and it can hurt us deeply.
Does this mean that we are helpless victims
of our circumstances?
Not at all!
Please pay close attention
and take note of why we can say
that Margaret, Feliks,
Miguel, Nikki, and Antoinette
are not helpless victims.
To the contrary,
they are conquerors.
As you watch and listen,
look for specific actions they took
to maintain their peace
and please give thoughtful attention
to ways that you can imitate their faith.
Growing up, I wondered,
‘Why does the Supreme Judge, God,
allow injustice and suffering?’
And inside of me,
I had this need to restore justice.
It was such a burning desire within me.
And with that in mind,
I moved to Russia to stay with my sister.
She started to study the Bible
and was overflowing with the truth.
We talked for hours till late into the night.
So that’s when my special relationship
with Jehovah began.
That’s when I got a taste of what it’s like
to have a caring Father.
It had been a while
since I was able to feel that.
My baptism date was very exciting.
The spiritual family I inherited
was very vast.
You can instantly feel the love.
I got baptized,
and it seemed like miracles happened
one after the other.
We had a great life.
And then
the persecution started
with Brother Christensen,
and then there was a ripple effect
of arrests, one after the other.
Then it was our turn.
In June of 2018,
a huge group of armed men came to us,
to our home.
They represented the ideals of my childhood.
But now these people,
this judicial system,
became the source of injustice to me.
I was sitting in a cage,
the same way my bugs used to be in a jar.
I guess I felt like they did.
In your head
at that moment when you hear the verdict
that you’ll stay in prison,
it’s like you’ve been knocked unconscious.
You’ve been hit in the head with something,
and there’s just a ringing sound
in your ears.
And so I was taken away in handcuffs.
Of course, I wasn’t in the best mood.
But then
the doors of the elevator opened up,
and in front of us,
a lot of brothers and sisters
were clapping their hands
as hard as they could.
And some were crying,
but not crying
because they felt sorry for me.
They cried because they loved us
and because they were proud of us.
That’s what always happens.
When you’re just about to lose
all your strength,
Jehovah does that something for you
that gives you a second wind.
And so, the applause, the love,
the tears,
the shouts,
“Hang in there; everything will be OK!”
—they gave me a second wind.
And with renewed strength,
I could run the next part of the race.
One of the guards was so surprised
that he said,
“Now that’s some support you’ve got!”
Yeah.
Without friends, I would be very lonely.
I would constantly be focusing on my illness.
The day I met Marissa was at a convention.
She’s a really great friend,
a spiritual friend.
When she’d take me
to my hospital appointments,
we would eat out.
I think food is just the common language
between everyone, you know.
When you talk about food, you know,
it’s like:
“Ah! Yes, we have something to talk about,”
you know.
I would be excited when she would take me
to my hospital appointment.
She always makes me laugh, you know.
She always helps me have a good time
no matter what.
Again, friends really help encourage me.
Proverbs 17:17 says:
“A true friend shows love at all times
and is a brother who is born
for times of distress.”
And I have seen this come true in my life.
When I lost my job at the bank,
well, I felt very depressed, troubled, tense.
And I have a good friend who I can talk to,
and when I told him how I was feeling,
he told me:
“Look, Miguel, don’t look for the same
“line of work.
“Maybe what you need to do
is make a change in your life.
“Why don’t you find some simple work
outside of an office for a time?
“That can help you to keep your eye simple
and allow you to provide for your family.”
I watched my wife make bread for our family,
and one day I told her:
“I’m going to make that bread,
but not for our family.
I’m going to make it to sell.”
So she told me, “No, are you crazy?”
It was a big change—right?—
from having a position at a bank
and handling a lot of money
to selling on the street.
So I told her,
“Look, I’m going to put this hat on,”
and I put like a chef’s hat on.
And I told her,
“I’ll be back in less than an hour,
whether I sell or not.”
And that’s what happened.
And to her surprise,
I came back without any bread.
So when I got ready
to leave the second time to sell,
she said: “OK. Go, but leave the hat here.”
I also started to iron clothes
for people in their homes,
and it looked strange
because normally where we live
that type of work is done by a woman.
But for a man to go and iron clothes
at someone’s home,
you don’t see that.
But I didn’t want to just sit back
with my arms crossed
and see what would happen.
No!
I had to put my hands to work
to earn a living for my family.
So I would preach one day,
and the next day I would iron clothes.
The next day I would preach, and the day
after that I would go out and sell bread.
So my mind was always occupied
on doing something,
either for the Kingdom or my family.
And that helped me a lot.
I was feeling so sad.
I really needed Jehovah’s help
to figure out what was going on with me.
And I remember
that the 2009 article about depression
came out.
And I realized: ‘OK, Jehovah,
you’re telling me this is what I have.
‘So now that I realize I have this,
I’ve got to figure out how I can manage it.’
So I changed my eating habits.
I started exercising a lot more.
I realized that exercising and eating healthy
really, really did help.
Also, I made a journal,
and I made different sections
of the different aspects of my depression
that I dealt with.
In each section, I would put scriptures;
I would put articles.
And the illustrations, the pictures,
they speak a lot without saying anything.
Jehovah hears us.
Jehovah cares.
After some time in prison,
they transferred me to a different cell.
In it were inmates who followed the orders
of the investigators.
They did everything they could
to other inmates
to make life unbearable.
Why did they do this?
To break a person
so that they would start to collaborate
with the investigators,
confess to everything, and then be able
to get transferred to another area.
Psalm 37:3:
“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good.”
I said: “Jehovah, please help me
to stay loyal to you.
Please help me.”
My prayers were really simple
—actually like two words: “Jehovah, help!
Jehovah, help! Jehovah, help!”
Despite how they treated me,
when I dealt with others,
I tried to treat them with kindness.
These people,
they made life
uncomfortable, unbearable,
but when they were treated kindly,
they started to soften.
They began to treat me differently.
When I was being transferred
out of that cell,
the inmate who ran the area
called me over to him and said,
“Come sit beside me.”
And I sat down.
Then he said, “If anybody in this prison
touches you,
tell him that I’ll come looking for him.”
Then he said, “Get his things”
(he told the other prisoners).
The cell doors opened
and the guards saw
a crowd of inmates
grabbing my things
and putting them out into the hallway.
I left the cell
without having to carry a thing!
The guard quietly closed the door.
And before the inmates
returned to their cells,
they even said goodbye, hugged me,
and said: “Hang in there!
You’re going to be OK.”
They went into the cell, and the guard
closed the door and asked me,
“Boy, how long have you been in there?”
I said, “Three weeks.”
He said: “Well, normally
people leave this cell beaten up,
“and they’re thrown out by the other inmates.
“They have to carry their own things,
and that’s if the other inmates
haven’t thrown their stuff out the door.”
He couldn’t believe what had just happened.
That’s Jehovah.
Exercising, changing my diet,
the publications, journaling
—that was my lifeline.
That really actually helped me
for a long time.
But it came to a point
where it stopped working as effectively.
I remember getting ready,
dressing for the meeting,
and I was fine.
I was getting dressed for the meeting
and about to walk out the door,
but I couldn’t.
There was this overwhelming fear
that came over me
and an overwhelming sadness
that came over me.
And I just lost it; I just started crying.
I couldn’t get myself together.
It was bad.
It got really bad;
my depression got really bad.
So it was very difficult for me
to approach the brothers
to ask them for help.
But at that time, I knew that if I didn’t,
that
something bad would happen.
So I decided: ‘You know what?
I’m going to ask for a shepherding call
with my brothers,’
because I’d never talked about my depression
with the elders at all.
This was my first time speaking with them.
And there was one brother, one of the elders,
who also battled depression.
And he suggested,
“Have you thought
about seeking medical help?”
Seeking professional help
was something I never wanted to do.
I thought that I didn’t need to do it,
but sometimes there comes a point where
you need additional help
and what you’re doing is not enough.
In this world, they make you feel
that it’s a bad thing,
that depression is a dirty word,
or that seeking medical help
is something that you don’t do.
But I realized also
that seeking medical help
was part of my being able
to worship Jehovah effectively.
That’s me doing my part.
Not everyone needs to take that step,
but for me, this is what I need to do.
And I’m glad I did it because of the fact
that I’ve never ever felt this good
in my life.
About a year later,
we were released.
But my wife and I understood
that they could put me back in prison again,
so
we needed to use
the time until then to the full
in the best way possible.
So, what did we do?
Psalm 119:165:
“Abundant peace belongs to those
who love your law.”
We had family worship,
read the Bible, and prayed together.
That’s how I spent my four months of freedom.
Then I was put into prison
for three years.
When they told me
about my cancer being gone,
I was really happy; I was ecstatic.
I was like: ‘Finally I’m going
to get to do normal things
‘that a kid my age should be able to do.
I don’t need to be afraid
or anxious anymore.’
Unfortunately, I did relapse again,
and basically right now
my present condition is
there’s nothing really more to do.
They’re just waiting
to let nature take its course basically,
and that’s it.
In harmony with Ephesians 4:26,
I had to let myself process the news
and let myself be sad and be angry.
Let yourself feel those feelings;
do not try to repress them.
But you can control
your thoughts and your actions.
Pretty much my whole life
has revolved around my illness,
but I’ve learned how to shift focus.
I just don’t focus on myself all the time.
I focus on others and their trials,
which are different but just as hard.
You read the stories
on jw.org in the Newsroom.
The Russian brothers and sisters,
I pray for them constantly because
they are going through a very tough time.
“There is [definitely] more happiness
in giving than receiving.”
And in our situation, this proved true.
I would say
this really helps to relieve your pain.
If you focus on yourself,
your pain gets worse.
When you focus on others
and on their problems,
your pain lessens, diminishes.
Hello!
Antoinette, I was so—
When I was told
that we would talk with each other,
this was something very special for me.
Same for me too.
When the brothers told me as well
about meeting you, I was really excited.
Thank you for your prayers
in behalf of the brothers in Russia.
They are precious.
We can learn so much from you.
Thank you.
It’s really nice of you to say that.
We’ve both been through very many hardships.
I’m sure prison was super hard.
You know, in prison,
us brothers had a saying,
“If you ask: ‘How much worse can it get?’
you won’t have to wait long to find out.”
Or in other words, when you think,
‘How much worse can it get?’
for sure something worse is bound to happen.
And when we received our sentence,
we thought:
‘Well, that’s it.
That’s the worst that could happen.’
And then, of course, it got worse.
Upon arrival at the prison,
we were beaten up
and for hours we were humiliated.
We thought, ‘How much worse can it get?’
Then the next day, we were told,
“You are going to the punishment cell.”
We thought,
‘Well, how much worse can it get?’
At first, it started with one floor,
then it went to another floor,
and then the whole entire hospital.
Every floor had COVID patients.
That was some of the hardest nursing
that I’ve ever done in my life
in all of my years of nursing.
And we lost a lot of good nurses
who were right in the trenches with me
who were in there doing their best.
We lost a lot of good people.
Even though I was on medication to help me,
it still didn’t take the depression away.
You’re like: ‘What’s the point?
‘I can’t save anyone.
I can’t, I can’t help anyone.’
It was devastating.
It truly, truly was devastating.
Have you ever felt as Feliks did
when he asked,
“How much worse can it get?”
Nevertheless, a spiritual person
can see each new challenge
as an opportunity to rely on Jehovah.
As we watch
the concluding part of this video,
please take note of how Jehovah strengthened
these brothers and sisters
and deepened their friendship with him.
Think about your own circumstances
and the ways that Jehovah
has helped you through trials,
and have full confidence
that he will continue to do so.
And then I decided
that I was going to stop asking,
“How much worse could it get?”
I asked Jehovah for endurance
and joy for that day—just for that day.
And at those times, I just
cry to Jehovah,
talk to Jehovah about how I’m feeling,
and just ask for his peace
to help me to deal.
I’ve talked to Jehovah
very intimately and personally
but never like I have
when I was so alone there.
I realized that I was going to die.
I asked Jehovah if he saw enough good in me,
that he would just resurrect me
and that I’d love to be in his new world
and see my husband again and my children.
And I thanked him so much
for the life that I had.
And I felt such a peace
like I’d never felt before.
And then
I just knew it was Jehovah getting me out.
The obedience, just doing what we were told,
it came from Jehovah, and it was so simple.
That gave him something to bless,
and it may have saved my life.
I just never wanted to be a burden on people,
but
the brothers and sisters
had come from all over the country
to do work for this house
and the other houses—all of them.
They made me feel wanted,
and they made me feel loved.
To feel like Jehovah cared enough
to give attention to me,
I
just felt so unworthy.
And here all these people
are here taking care of me.
And you just look at them,
and then you think:
‘I’m part of this organization.
I’ve got to do better.
I’ve got to be like them
and make other people happy.’
When I’m able to help people
who are battling depression,
I feel like Jehovah is using me in that way,
and it makes me happy
that I can be of use to Jehovah.
It’s good to feel—
It’s so nice to feel good again,
to feel happy again, to be able to smile,
to be able to take in enjoyment
of the small things, you know,
in Jehovah’s creation
—and, you know, just be happy that I’m alive.
So
yeah, yeah.
Now I have a stable job.
I work at a hardware store.
And I feel at peace.
The adversities have made me stronger,
and overall, I have
a much closer relationship with Jehovah.
But I’m still making bread.
And at home, yeah,
I’m the one who irons the clothes.
After a while, I found out
that I was being deported.
I remember getting off the train.
They took me through the back door,
but my wife, Zhenya,
was standing at the main entrance.
She was on the phone. She couldn’t see me.
She was looking at the main entrance.
And I threw my bag down as I ran to her.
She could see from the corner of her eyes
someone was running.
She was a little confused, even scared.
And there I was
hugging the person I loved the most.
It was one
of the most beautiful days of my life.
Hi.
Privet.
Hello.
When I heard that you were praying for us
and for the brothers and sisters in Russia,
it really encouraged me and Feliks.
It’s such an example for me personally.
We mentioned it in our prayer yesterday;
Feliks was saying
that you are a great example
of how we need
to genuinely care
for our brothers and sisters.
We love you very much.
Goodbye.
It was nice meeting you.
My cancer is uncurable,
but I know the cure is in the new system.
So that’s the cure!
I like to imagine, ‘When that time happens,
what will I be doing?’
Obviously, I’m going to be jumping for joy
because I’m going to be rid of my cancer.
I’m going to enjoy food
that we never really got to enjoy,
and I’m going to have so many animals.
I’m going to make a house.
I’m going to learn how to make a house.
Peace in this world is not the absence
of illness,
danger,
persecution,
or economic problems.
Peace in this world
is listening to Jehovah’s guidance,
praying to Jehovah constantly,
meditating on Jehovah’s Word
and his promises.
Peace in this world is also
having good friends by our side
and having a good sense of humor.
What I’ve learned from all of this
is peace isn’t from what’s outside,
from what’s going on,
or from what you’re experiencing.
I’ve learned that peace is on the inside,
and that comes from Jehovah.
These examples we’ve just seen
are of ordinary people
“with feelings like ours.”
Yet, they felt peace
even when confronting serious trials.
How did they do it?
When Miguel lost his job,
he kept his focus on serving Jehovah
and he was not too proud to do humble work
to provide for his family.
Margaret was prepared for a natural disaster,
and throughout her ordeal,
she prayed to Jehovah.
While struggling with depression,
Nikki did research using our publications
and asked for help from the elders.
Even when facing brutal persecution,
Feliks showed kindness to his persecutors.
He knew that the way he responded
would reflect Christian qualities.
And dear Antoinette,
despite her diagnosis,
focuses not on herself
but on helping others.
As she said, the cure for her
—as it is for all of us—
is God’s Kingdom.
If you are experiencing trials,
focus on what you can control,
help others,
be grateful,
and rely on Jehovah and his organization.
If you are not experiencing serious trials,
do what you can to prepare for them
by building yourself up spiritually.
Do not be anxious.
Fear of what might happen
is often worse than the trial itself.
Trust in Jehovah, and be assured
that he will never abandon his friends.
The dear brothers and sisters
whom we’ve just listened to
are doing well spiritually.
We thank them
for participating in these interviews.
We’d also like to thank
all our brothers and sisters
working in the medical field
who have gone the extra mile
during this pandemic.
James 5:11 reads:
“We consider happy those who have endured.
“You have heard of the endurance of Job
“and have seen the outcome Jehovah gave,
that Jehovah is very tender in affection
and merciful.”
The blessings we receive by enduring trials
can strengthen us for the future
and help us to become the kind of person
that Jehovah wants us to be.
The inner peace and joy we experience
is a gift from Jehovah.
As these brothers and sisters
from around the world
have reminded us,
we need never doubt
that our wonderful heavenly Father will bless
all those who continue loving him.